Create 01-06-22_writeup.md (#165)
very-good-science/data-ethics-club: site/contents/write_ups/2022/01-06-22_writeup.md

## What factors should guide decisions about what level of participation best suits a project? Does this happen in practice?

The five frameworks seem high-level and the practical application might be difficult. We liked that there was a critique included. Factors that should influence level of participation will vary widely from project to project.

Why might we feel inclined to think "empower" is the "best" framework? There's a question about feasibility: how feasible is it to "empower" the relevant communities?

What about *limiting* participation? There might be circumstances where you don't want too much public access/input (e.g. clinical trial participants).

The people who have capacity to involve themselves more may not be too representative (possibly missing out on less privileged voices). Is it possible that including participatory practice might be seen as just another layer of red tape? ... has GDPR regulated 'inform' now?

There is a need for teams to be diverse and, therefore, open to empowering different voices from the outset.

> Some think you shouldn't collect data without consulting those affected by it. This can bog things down. Does it happen in practise? 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some think you shouldn't collect data without consulting those affected by it. But given that this usually requires time and financial investment, how often does it actually happen in practice?
```

From our own experiences, in the subfield of social media, data collection is not very ethical at all. The NHS, on the other hand does a really good job of protecting people's data (PPI etc).

## Is the most participation always the best?

We were of the opinion that most partcipation is *not* always the best. 

> You need to commit to a certain level of maintenance for data to be worked with. If this needs to be run by the participants, this can really bog things down. (This will be evident to anyone who has ever tried to organise a group holiday).

Reviewer: 😁

> There's a difficulty of presenting it as a hierarchy, implying one is better and one is worse. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There's a difficulty of presenting it as a hierarchy, implying one is better and one is worse. Often data is collected about specific sub-populations who are being 'studied', and they are often being 'studied' because they may have particular health conditions or life circumstances we are trying to research. However, these life circumstances or health conditions may mean that these population groups may not necessarily appreciate having to put a lot of time in managing their participation and data. On the other hand, it would be a particularly effective measure against the exploitation of under-served communities, many of whom have histories of being exploited for the purpose of research.
```

Because humans are sentient, it opens you up to negotiations. With data about plants for example, there is no negotiation with the objects. You make a lot of decisions on their "behalf".

"If you did understand, you'd love it and think it was super ethical I swear." 

"But I don't understand it." 

"But if you did..."

There has been some interesting research on how privacy statements are worded got you more access (even if they were legally equivalent, but with behaivoural nudges). Why would anyone ever do anything bad with this data? E.g. adobe releasing video editing software that enabled deep fakes.

Is it always good to have participation? Maybe it's good to mandate some level of participation, even if it's not the most stringent level. Thinking about people who are underrepresented for example.

## What do you see as being barriers to participatory data stewardship, and how could these realistically be overcome?

> This effort can be demanding on researchers. Perhaps there should be "centralised" institutional support, creating "pools" of relevant participants to reduce duplication of effort. There is a lack of funding to practically implement this framework.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This effort can be demanding on researchers, and if the level of participation is high it can be demanding on participants too. Perhaps there should be "centralised" institutional support, creating "pools" of relevant participants to reduce duplication of effort. There is a lack of funding to practically implement this framework.
```

In general, there is a need for a mindset change. Instead of building technology as quickly as possible, we might want to build it slowly and mindfully. 

> Teams handling data could be compared to flowers. They can bloom if they are diverse, should cross-polenate to ensure they aren't duplicating efforts, and they cannot grow on barren lands or within nerd caves. Budding flowers will naturally include these kinds of participation question, while in a baren desert data scientists won't have space to ask these kinds of questions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Teams handling data could be compared to flowers. They can bloom if they are diverse, should cross-pollinate to ensure they aren't duplicating efforts, and they cannot grow on barren lands or within nerd caves. Budding flowers will naturally include these kinds of participation questions, while in a barren desert data scientists won't have space, or colleague input, to ask these kinds of questions.
```
